feat: article for 4.13 (#1194)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-4130.mdx

- [**Logging Improvements**](#logging-improvements)
- [**Support for remote LibSQL databases**](#support-for-remote-libsql-databases)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Stable: Request Rewriting

[In Astro 4.8](https://astro.build/blog/astro-480/#experimental-request-rewriting), we added experimental support for request rewriting. In Astro 4.13, we're excited to announce that request rewriting is now stable! This feature allows you to rewrite incoming requests to different paths or URLs, enabling you to create custom routing rules for your site.

If you were using request rewriting in Astro 4.8, you can now remove the `experimental.rewrites` option from your Astro config. The feature is now enabled by default.

```diff
import { defineConfig } from 'astro';

export default defineConfig({
-  experimental: {
-    rewriting: true
-  }
})
```

> As a reminder, request rewriting is a powerful feature that can be used to render another page without changing the URL of the browser in Astro pages and endpoints. For more information on this feature, check out the [Astro documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/routing/#rewrite).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Request rewriting is a powerful feature that can be used to render another page without changing the URL of the browser in Astro pages and endpoints. For more information on this feature, check out the [Astro routing documentation on rewrites](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/routing/#rewrite).
```
When I saw "**As a reminder**, rewriting is a powerful feature..." it kind of sounded like a warning and I was kind of expecting, "only use this if you know what you're doing."  :smile: 
 
I think you could do without, or if you want to stir up excitement with a conclusion kind of sentence,  something like:

"We are excited to see this powerful feature leave its experimental phase..."
"We are excited to make this powerful feature available to everyone..."

(Also, probably helpful to distinguish to avoid having multiple links saying "Astro Documentation".)

If you wanted a sentence about a specific use case, or a simple visual code sample showing usage, not just the config... something like one of these from the docs PR could do:

> Rewrites can be useful for showing the same content at multiple paths (e.g. `/products/shoes/men/` and `/products/men/shoes`/) without needing to maintain two different source files.

and/or

>Rewrites are also helpful to render alternative localized content, such as displaying the `/es/` version of a page when the `/es-CU/` (Cuban Spanish) URL path is visited:

```astro
---
// src/pages/es-cu/articles/introduction.astro
return Astro.rewrite("/es/articles/introduction")
---
```

Author: It was more so about saying "If you were not already aware, rewriting is a.."

## Stable: Content Collections JSON Schemas

[In Astro 4.5](https://astro.build/blog/astro-450/#experimental-json-schemas-for-data-collections), we introduced the (experimental) ability to automatically generate JSON schemas for data content collections. In Astro 4.13, this feature is now stable! If you were using content collection JSON schemas in Astro 4.5, you can now remove the `experimental.contentCollectionJsonSchema` option from your Astro config. The feature is now enabled by default.

```diff
import { defineConfig } from 'astro';

export default defineConfig({
-  experimental: {
-    contentCollectionJsonSchema: true
-  }
})
```

> When you define a data content collection in your Astro project, Astro will now automatically generate a JSON schema for the collection. This schema can then be used in your editor to provide autocompletion, validation and more for your data. For more information on this feature, check out the [Astro documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#enabling-json-schema-generation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you define a data content collection in your Astro project, Astro will now automatically generate a JSON schema for the collection. This schema can then be used in your editor to provide autocompletion, validation and more for your data. For more information on this feature, check out the [Astro content collections schema documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#enabling-json-schema-generation).
```

## Logging Improvements

> As part of our endless crusade against slow builds, Astro 4.13 includes a small improvement to the logging output during the build process. Pages that took a long time will now have their time logged in red, making it easier to spot bottlenecks in your build process. May there be less of these in your future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of our endless crusade against slow builds, Astro 4.13 includes a small improvement to the logging output during the build process. Pages that take a long time will now have their time logged in red, making it easier to spot bottlenecks in your build process. May there be fewer of these in your future!
```
Present tense feels a bit more natural here since the rest of the sentences are mostly present tense verbs?

I think an image of the output would go really nicely here!

## Support for remote LibSQL databases

Astro DB now supports connecting to remote LibSQL databases. This feature allows you to connect to a LibSQL database using any of the supported protocols (`libsql://`, `wss://`, `memory://`, etc.)

To use this feature, update the `ASTRO_STUDIO_REMOTE_DB_URL` with the URL of your remote LibSQL database.

```shell
ASTRO_STUDIO_REMOTE_DB_URL=libsql://example.com:5432 npm run dev

> ```

Reviewer: Hoping to get some info from Fryuni on this in the PR! I am hoping that getting a docs PR showing an example of how to use this will make it easier to write about!

## Bug Fixes and Special Thanks

As we do, Astro 4.13 includes more bug fixes and smaller improvements that couldn't make it into this post! Check out the full [release notes](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/refs/heads/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md#4130) to learn more.

> Special thanks to [@sarah11918](https://github.com/sarah11918), [Fryuni](https://github.com/Fryuni), [Alexander Niebuhr](https://github.com/alexanderniebuhr) and everyone else who contributed to this release.

Reviewer: Does Ema get a thank you? :smile:

> Special thanks to [@sarah11918](https://github.com/sarah11918), [Fryuni](https://github.com/Fryuni), [Alexander Niebuhr](https://github.com/alexanderniebuhr) and everyone else who contributed to this release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special thanks to [@sarah11918](https://github.com/sarah11918), [Fryuni](https://github.com/Fryuni), [Alexander Niebuhr](https://github.com/alexanderniebuhr), and everyone else who contributed to this release.
```
